Docs: Installation documentation reworked (#5740)
WeblateOrg/weblate: docs/admin/install.rst

Optional dependencies
+++++++++++++++++++++

The following optional modules are used for some Weblate features.
You can find all of them in :file:`requirements-optional.txt`.

> ``Mercurial`` for Mercurial repositoriy support.

Author: Should be "repository"

    https://www.mercurial-scm.org/
``phply`` for PHP support.
    https://github.com/viraptor/phply
``tesserocr`` for OCR screenshots.
    https://github.com/sirfz/tesserocr
``akismet`` for suggestion spam protection.
    https://github.com/ubernostrum/akismet
``ruamel.yaml`` for :ref:`yaml`.
    https://pypi.org/project/ruamel.yaml/
``Zeep`` for :ref:`ms-terminology`.
    https://docs.python-zeep.org/
``aeidon`` for :ref:`subtitles`.
    https://pypi.org/project/aeidon/

Database back-end dependencies
++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++

> Weblate supports PostgreSQL, MySQL and MariaDB, see :ref:`database-setup` and

Author: ```suggestion
Weblate supports PostgreSQL, MySQL and MariaDB. Read the :ref:`database-setup` and
```

> Weblate supports PostgreSQL, MySQL and MariaDB. Read the :ref:`database-setup` and

Author: ```suggestion
Weblate supports PostgreSQL, MariaDB, and MySQL. Read the :ref:`database-setup` and
```

back-end documentation for more details.

Other system requirements
+++++++++++++++++++++++++

The following dependencies must be installed on the system:

``Git``
    https://git-scm.com/
Pango, Cairo and related header files and GIR introspection data
    https://cairographics.org/, https://pango.gnome.org/, see :ref:`pangocairo`

The following dependencies are optional:

``git-review`` for Gerrit support.
    https://pypi.org/project/git-review/
``git-svn`` for Subversion support.
    https://git-scm.com/docs/git-svn
``tesseract`` and its data for OCR screenshots.
    https://github.com/tesseract-ocr/tesseract
``licensee`` for detecting license when creating components.
    https://github.com/licensee/licensee

Build-time dependencies
+++++++++++++++++++++++

To build some of the :ref:`python-deps` you might need to install their

> dependencies. This depends on how you install them, so please read

Author: ```suggestion
dependencies. This depends on how you install them, you can read
```

> the documentation for individual packages.

Author: ```suggestion
the documentation for the respective packages.
```

Python bindings for those you need to install system libraries first - you need
both Cairo and Pango, which in turn need GLib. All those should be installed
with development files and GObject introspection data.
Weblate uses Pango and Cairo to render bitmap widgets (see
:ref:`promotion`) and checks (see :ref:`fonts`).
To properly install Python bindings for those you need to install its system
libraries first. You need both Cairo and Pango, which in turn need GLib.
All those should be installed with corresponding development files
and GObject introspection data.

.. _verify:

Verifying release signatures
----------------------------

Weblate release are cryptographically signed by the releasing developer.
Currently this is Michal Čihař. Fingerprint of his PGP key is:
Weblate releases are cryptographically signed by the release developer.
Currently this is Michal Čihař. The fingerprint of his PGP key is:

.. code-block:: console

    63CB 1DF1 EF12 CF2A C0EE 5A32 9C27 B313 42B7 511D

and you can get more identification information from <https://keybase.io/nijel>.
and you can get more identification info from <https://keybase.io/nijel>.

> You should verify that the signature matches the archive you have downloaded.

Author: "Should" is not strictly a necessity.

> This way you can be sure that you are using the same code that was released.

Author: This is slightly ambiguous, and could easily fail in translation.

Verify that the signature matches the archive you have downloaded.
This way you are sure you are using the same code that was released.
You should also verify the date of the signature to make sure that you
downloaded the latest version.

> Each archive is accompanied with ``.asc`` files which contain the PGP signature

Author: Fairly sure this is an error, since "files" doesn't correspond to "signature (singular) for it"

> Each archive is accompanied with an ``.asc`` files (containing the PGP signature

Author: Should be "file". Not sure.

         63CB1DF1EF12CF2AC0EE5A329C27B31342B7511D
   uid           [ultimate] Michal Čihař <michal@cihar.com>
   uid           [ultimate] Michal Čihař <nijel@debian.org>

>    uid           [ultimate] [JPEG image of size 8848]

Author: OK, but somebody is going to complain about it sooner or later.

>    uid           [ultimate] [JPEG image of size 8848]

Author: ```suggestion
   uid           [ultimate] [jpeg image of size 8848]
```

>    uid           [ultimate] [JPEG image of size 8848]

Reviewer: This shows what a program prints. This is not a place to do fixes, if you want to do them, do that at the program showing this.

   gpg:                using RSA key 87E673AF83F6C3A0C344C8C3F4AA229D4D58C245
   gpg: Good signature from "Michal Čihař <michal@cihar.com>" [ultimate]
   gpg:                 aka "Michal Čihař <nijel@debian.org>" [ultimate]

>    gpg:                 aka "[JPEG image of size 8848]" [ultimate]

Author: ```suggestion
   gpg:                 aka "[jpeg image of size 8848]" [ultimate]
```

   gpg:          There is no indication that the signature belongs to the owner.
   Primary key fingerprint: 63CB 1DF1 EF12 CF2A C0EE  5A32 9C27 B313 42B7 511D

The problem here is that anybody could issue the key with this name.

> You need to ensure the key is actually owned by the mentioned person.

Author: "the person it mentions" is better.

   gpg:                using RSA key 87E673AF83F6C3A0C344C8C3F4AA229D4D58C245
   gpg: Good signature from "Michal Čihař <michal@cihar.com>" [ultimate]
   gpg:                 aka "Michal Čihař <nijel@debian.org>" [ultimate]

>    gpg:                 aka "[JPEG image of size 8848]" [ultimate]

Author: ```suggestion
   gpg:                 aka "[jpeg image of size 8848]" [ultimate]
```

   gpg:                 aka "Michal Čihař (Braiins) <michal.cihar@braiins.cz>" [ultimate]

> Should the signature be invalid (meaning archive has been changed),

Author: ```suggestion
Should the signature be invalid (meaning the archive has been changed),
```

.. hint::

   If you don't want to make the Weblate user a superuser in PostgreSQL, you can
   omit that and perform some of the migration steps manually.

>    This is an example of a PostgreSQL superuser in the scheme Weblate uses:

Author: Not sure here

Author: But that is no way to live. I am however 100% sure I will forget to mention it. This is the one I thought was more ready to go.

>    This is an example of a PostgreSQL superuser in the scheme Weblate uses:

Author: ```suggestion
   This is an example of a PostgreSQL superuser in the schema Weblate uses:
```

>    This is an example of a PostgreSQL superuser in the `schema <https://www.postgresql.org/docs/9.1/ddl-schemas.html>`_ Weblate uses:

Reviewer: This is now completely wrong. It should be executed as a PostgreSQL superuser. Also, I don't think that the link is useful here. Anybody fiddling with PostgreSQL permissions will understand what a PostgreSQL schema is.

Author: This is an example of doing so as a PostgreSQL superuser in the `schema <https://www.postgresql.org/docs/9.1/ddl-schemas.html>`_ Weblate uses

(still haven't read the PostgreSQL documentation) Used it many times though.
Spending effort on trying to figure out what something says isn't conducive to actually doing something with it. If people actually read the documentation, it should. (Even though I mostly don't :)

        }
    }

Database migrations performs `ALTER ROLE
<https://www.postgresql.org/docs/12/sql-alterrole.html>`_ on the database role
used by Weblate. In most cases the name of the role matches the username.

> In more complex setups the role name is different from username and you will

Author: the username

.. hint::

    Some Weblate features will perform better with :ref:`postgresql`.
    This includes searching and translation memory, which both utilize full-text
    features in the database and PostgreSQL implementation is superior.

Weblate can also be used with MariaDB (10.2.7 or later) or MySQL (5.7.8 or later),
please read :ref:`django:mysql-notes` and :ref:`django:mariadb-notes` for caveats using
Django with those. Because of these limitations it is recommended to use
:ref:`postgresql` for new installations.

> Following configuration is recommended for Weblate:

Author: ```suggestion
The following configuration is recommended for Weblate:
```

.. hint::

    Some Weblate features will perform better with :ref:`postgresql`.
    This includes searching and translation memory, which both utilize full-text
    features in the database and PostgreSQL implementation is superior.

Weblate can also be used with MariaDB (10.2.7 or later) or MySQL (5.7.8 or later),
please read :ref:`django:mysql-notes` and :ref:`django:mariadb-notes` for caveats using
Django with those. Because of these limitations it is recommended to use
:ref:`postgresql` for new installations.

The following configuration is recommended for Weblate:

* Use the ``utf8mb4`` charset to allow representation of higher Unicode planes (for example emojis).
* Configure the server with ``innodb_large_prefix`` to allow longer indices on text fields.
* Set the isolation level to ``READ COMMITTED``.
* The SQL mode should be set to ``STRICT_TRANS_TABLES``.

MySQL 8.x, MariaDB 10.5.x or newer have reasonable default configuration so
that no server tweaking should be necessary, and all that is needed can be
configured on the client side.

Below is an example :file:`/etc/my.cnf.d/server.cnf` for a server with 8 GB of
RAM. These settings should be sufficient for most installs.

> MySQL and MariaDB have tunables to increase server performance that are

Author: "that is" and "unnecessary"
"tunables" could probably be simplified(?)

considered not necessary unless you are planning on having large numbers of

> concurrent users accessing the system. See the various vendors documentation for

Author: "vendor's"
Should find some links.

details about this.

To reduce issues it is absolutely critical that the

> ``innodb_file_per_table`` setting is configured correctly and that

Author: MOVE. Could possibly be that a script calls for these to be restarted to see that they work.

Running behind reverse proxy
++++++++++++++++++++++++++++

Several features in Weblate rely on being able to get the IP address of the client.
This includes :ref:`rate-limit`, :ref:`spam-protection`, and :ref:`audit-log`.

In default configuration Weblate parses IP address from ``REMOTE_ADDR`` which
is set by the WSGI handler.

> In case you are running a reverse proxy, this field most likely contain

Author: contains

its address. You need to configure Weblate to trust additional HTTP headers and
parse the IP address from these.
This can not be enabled by default as it would allow IP address spoofing for
installations not using a reverse proxy.

> Enabling :setting:`IP_BEHIND_REVERSE_PROXY` might be enough for most setups,

Author: MOVE "usual" is removed here

``DATABASES``

>     Connectivity to database server, please read Django's documentation for more

Author: >Connectivity to database server
?

Properly configure admins
+++++++++++++++++++++++++

> Put the correct admin addresses in the :setting:`ADMINS` setting to defining who

Author: to define

Set properly SECURE_HSTS_SECONDS
++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++

If your site is served over SSL, consider setting a value for :setting:`django:SECURE_HSTS_SECONDS`
in the :file:`settings.py` to enable HTTP Strict Transport Security.
By default it is set to 0 (as shown below).

.. code-block:: python

   SECURE_HSTS_SECONDS = 0

> If set to a non-zero integer value, the :class:`django:django.middleware.security.SecurityMiddleware`

Author: Is there a way to say this that isn't so cumbersome?

> applies the :ref:`django:http-strict-transport-security` header to all responses without it.

Author: MOVE

If set to a non-zero integer value, the :class:`django:django.middleware.security.SecurityMiddleware`
sets the :ref:`django:http-strict-transport-security` header on all responses that do not already have it.
applies the :ref:`django:http-strict-transport-security` header to all responses without it.

.. warning::

>     Setting this incorrectly can irreversibly (for some time) break your site. Read the

Author: How is it irreversible, but only for some time?
Needs to be undone via the terminal?

>     Setting this incorrectly can irreversibly (for some time) break your site.

Author: ```suggestion
    Setting this incorrectly can irreversibly (for some time) `break your site <https://docs.djangoproject.com/en/3.0/ref/settings/#secure-hsts-seconds>`_.
```

>     Setting this incorrectly can irreversibly (for some time) `break your site <https://docs.djangoproject.com/en/3.0/ref/settings/#secure-hsts-seconds>`_.

Author: MOVE and figure something out

.. note::

>    To turn off Weblate sending e-mails, set :setting:`django:EMAIL_BACKEND`

Author: prevent Weblate from

   to ``django.core.mail.backends.dummy.EmailBackend``.

>    This will prevent *all* e-mail delivery, including registration- or

Author: turn off

well (depending on the Git version you use).

You can change the directory used by Weblate in :file:`settings.py`, for

> example by setting it to the ``configuration`` folder of where you installed Weblate:

Author: MOVE

Template loading
++++++++++++++++

It is recommended to use a cached template loader for Django.

> It caches parsed templates, avoiding the need parse every single request.

Author: MOVE

+++++++++++++++++++++++++

For optimal performance, it is good idea to run some maintenance tasks in the

> background.

Author: ```suggestion
background.

.. versionchanged:: 3.2

```

> This is now automatically done by :ref:`celery` and covers the following tasks:

Author: Since version?

Reviewer: ..see `versionchanged` below.

> This is now automatically done by :ref:`celery` and covers the following tasks:

Author: ```suggestion
    This is now automatically done by :ref:`celery` and covers the following tasks:
```

* Configuration health check (hourly).
* Committing pending changes (hourly), see :ref:`lazy-commit` and :djadmin:`commit_pending`.
* Updating component alerts (daily).
* Update remote branches (nightly), see :setting:`AUTO_UPDATE`.
* Translation-memory backup to JSON (daily), see :djadmin:`dump_memory`.
* Fulltext- and database-maintenance tasks (daily and weekly tasks), see :djadmin:`cleanuptrans`.

.. versionchanged:: 3.2

   Since version 3.2, the default way of executing these tasks is by using Celery,
   and Weblate already comes with proper configuration for it, see :ref:`celery`.

.. _production-encoding:

System locales and encoding
+++++++++++++++++++++++++++

If for some reason the system locales for your distribution are not
configured to UTF-8 capable ones, you can do so by

> editing :file:`/etc/default/locale` and setting ``LANG="C.UTF-8"`` there.

Author: This seems to suggest C.UTF-8 is UTF-8, when really it changes the locale that could have been UTF-8 all along(?).

Reviewer: `C` locale is not UTF-8.

Author: Right, however if I have "LANG="nb_NO.UTF-8"" I don't need "C.UTF-8", which I could be lead to believe is the only valid (or a better) option.

Reviewer: Yes, the original docs said that for a reason:

> The system locales should be configured to UTF-8 capable ones. On most Linux distributions this is the default setting.

Author: Evident from "if for some reason", but I guess.
MOVE

Using custom certificate authority
++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++

> Weblate verifies SSL certificates during HTTPS requests.

Author: MOVE

In case you are using a custom certificate authority not trusted in default
bundles, you will have to add its certificate as trusted.

> The preferred approach is to do this at a system level, please check the

Author: read

> documentation for your distribution for details on how to do this'

Author: .

(on Debian this can be done by placing the CA certificate into
:file:`/usr/local/share/ca-certificates/` and running :command:`update-ca-certificates`).

Once this is done, system tools will trust the certificate and this includes
Git.

> For Python code, you will need to configure requests to use the system CA bundle

Author: certificate authority (CA)

> instead of the one shipped with Python. This can be achieved by placing the following

Author: MOVE

Compressing client assets
+++++++++++++++++++++++++

Weblate comes with many JavaScript and CSS files.
Compressing them before sending them to a client yields better performance.
In the default configuration this is done on the fly at the cost of a little overhead.

> On big installations, it is recommended to enable offline compression mode.

Author: Should be in quotes

    COMPRESS_OFFLINE = True

> On each deploy you need to compress the files to match the current version:

Author: deployment
MOVE

.. hint::

   In case you are not experienced with the services described below,
   you might want to try :doc:`install/docker`.

Several services are needed to run Weblate, the recommended setup consists of:

* Database server (see :ref:`database-setup`)
* Cache server (see :ref:`production-cache`)
* Front-end web-server for static files and SSL termination (see :ref:`static-files`)
* WSGI server for dynamic content (see :ref:`uwsgi`)
* Celery for executing background tasks (see :ref:`celery`)

.. note::

   Some dependencies are shared between the services. The cache and
   database should for example be running when starting up Celery or
   uWSGI processes.

> Unless you need to split them up to distribute load, you will run all

Author: the load

.. warning::

    DO NOT USE THIS SERVER IN A PRODUCTION SETTING. It has not gone through
    security audits or performance tests.

>     Also read about :djadmin:`django:runserver` in the Django documentation.

Author: Read more about
MOVE

.. versionchanged:: 2.4

    Prior to version 2.4, Weblate didn't properly use the Django static files

>     framework and setup was more complex.

Author: comma

++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++

To run a production web-server, use the WSGI wrapper installed with Weblate (if

> running in virtualenv it is installed as

Author: MOVE

.. note::

    Weblate requires Python 3, so please ensure you are running the Python 3
    variant of mod_wsgi. Usually it is available as a separate package, for
    example ``libapache2-mod-wsgi-py3``.

> .. seealso::

Author: "Running Weblate under path" means what?
The $path set for Weblate?

Reviewer: When Weblate is available on `https://example.com/weblate/`.

.. note::

>     Weblate requires Python 3, so please ensure you are running the Python 3

Author: It requires 3.6
MOVE

   :ref:`Redis broker configuration in Celery <celery:broker-redis-configuration>`

> For development, you might want to use Eager configuration, which processes

Author: Not sure if "eager" or "Eager"

Reviewer: https://docs.celeryproject.org/en/stable/userguide/testing.html

Author: Would that be development of Weblate, or "in production"?

> For development, you might want to use Eager configuration, which processes

Author: ```suggestion
For development, you might want to use `eager mode <https://docs.celeryproject.org/en/stable/userguide/testing.html>`_ configuration, which processes
```

   :ref:`Redis broker configuration in Celery <celery:broker-redis-configuration>`

> For development, you might want to use `eager mode <https://docs.celeryproject.org/en/stable/userguide/testing.html>`_ configuration, which processes

Author: MOVE

Running Celery as system service
++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++

Most likely you will want to run Celery as a daemon, as described in
:doc:`celery:userguide/daemonizing`. For Linux setup using
systemd, you can use the example files shipped in the :file:`examples` folder
listed below.

> The systemd unit should be placed in :file:`/etc/systemd/system/celery-weblate.service`:

Author: MOVE

Periodic tasks using Celery beat
++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++

Weblate comes with built-in setup for scheduled tasks.
Define additional tasks in :file:`settings.py`, for example see :ref:`lazy-commit`.

> The tasks are supposed to be executed by Celery beat daemon.

Author: the

> If it is not working properly, it might not be running or its database corrupted.

Author: is

Collecting error reports
------------------------

> As all software, Weblate can fail. To collect useful failure

Author: -to. Collecting

+++++++

> Weblate has built-in support for `Rollbar <https://rollbar.com/>`_. To use

Author: ```suggestion
Weblate has built-in support for `Rollbar <https://rollbar.com/>`_.
```

> Follow the instructions for `Rollbar notifier for

Reviewer: This does not match previous line: "To use Follow..."

server and import it on the new one. Alternatively you can use replication in
case your database supports it.

> The best approach is to use tools specific to the database, as they are usually

Author: MOVE
